Changelog 25.9.0 (#15266)
conda/conda: CHANGELOG.md

[//]: # (current developments)

## 25.9.0 (2025-09-26)

### Enhancements

* Add conda doctor check for if the pinned file is ill-formatted. (#7978 via #15022)
* If an HTTP error response includes a field named "detail", relay that as the error message. Stop uppercasing of error message. (#15021 via #15037)
* Raise exceptions to prevent renaming or removing the `default_activation_env`. (#15061)

> * `conda list pattern` raises an exception with exit code 1 if the query did not match any packages in the target environment. (#15074 via #15075)

Author: Since we prefer to write our changelog in the imperative form I suggest:

```suggestion
* Make `conda list REGEX` raise an exception with exit code 1 when the regular expression does not match any packages in the target environment. (#15074 via #15075)
```

* Add bytes cache to support sharded repodata. (#15083)
* Add a "file locking" health check to `conda doctor`. (#13921 & #14948 via #15114)
* Add a new environment spec plugin, called cep-24, that implements the environment.yml specification in cep-0024. This is enabled by default. (#15120)

> * Change the `environment.yml` plugin to be disabled by default. Users can explicitly use it by setting the `--environment-spec` flag. (#15120)

Author: `--env-spec` is the alias so we should use the full name:

https://github.com/conda/conda/blob/8d6c8d60443940c562b0f3265b829a640cd44322/conda/cli/helpers.py#L620-L622

```suggestion
* Change the `environment.yml` plugin to be disabled by default. Users can explicitly use it by setting the `--environment-specifier` flag. (#15120)
```

* Remove constant `conda.gateways.disk.delete.try_rmdir_all_empty`. (#15224)
* Remove constant `conda.gateways.disk.delete.move_to_trash`. (#15224)
* Remove constant `conda.gateways.disk.delete.move_path_to_trash`. (#15224)
* Remove function `conda.gateways.logging.initialize_root_logger`. (#15224)
* Remove module `conda.models.leased_path_entry`. (#15224)
* Remove function `conda.plugins.manager.get_virtual_packages`. Use `conda.plugins.manager.get_virtual_package_records` instead. (#15224)
* Remove function `conda.env.utils.make_temp_envs_dir`. Use `conda.testing.tmp_envs_dir` instead. (#15224)

### Docs

* Update documentation to reflect that `conda` CLI arguments have a higher precedence than environment variables. (#15054)

### Other

* Refactor the CLI layer to use the environment model. (#15039)
* Make the `environment.yml` plugin try to handle the environment file, if all other environment spec plugins fail (as a final try). (#15120)
* Update the tests to accept quotes in Python 3.12 argparse errors. (#15172)
* Improve the `EnvironmentIsFrozenError` exception message to indicate how to bypass it with `--override-frozen`. (#15228)

> * Check conda-build source code for missing imports in CI (#15229)

Author: ```suggestion
* Check conda-build source code for missing imports in CI. (#15229)
```

* Remove `conda.activate._Activator._parse_and_set_arts` argument `arguments`. (#15179)
* Remove `conda.activate.ensure_binary`. Use `conda.common.compat.ensure_binary` instead.  (#15179)
* Remove `conda.activate.ensure_fs_path_encoding`. (#15179)
* Remove constants `conda.activate._cygpath`, `conda.activate.native_path_to_unix`, `conda.activate.unix_path_to_native`, `conda.activate.path_identity`. (#15179)
* Remove `conda.cli.common.confirm`. Use `conda.reporters.confirm_yn` instead. (#15180)
* Remove `conda.cli.common.confirm_yn`. Use `conda.reporters.confirm_yn` instead. (#15180)
* Remove `conda.cli.common.print_envs_list`. Use `conda.reporters.render(style='env_list')` instead. (#15180)
* Remove `conda env create` `remote_definition` argument. (#15181)
* Remove `conda env update` `remote_definition` argument. (#15181)
* Remove `conda.env.specs.binstar.BinstarSpec` class. (#15181)
* Remove experimental Binstar environment spec plugin. (#15181)
* Remove `conda.cli.main_env_remove.execute`.Use `conda.cli.main_remove.execute` instead. (#15182)
* Remove `conda.cli.install.validate_new_prefix`. Use `conda.cli.install.validate_new_prefix` instead. (#15182)

> * Remove constant `win_path_to_unix`. (#15184)
> * Remove constant `unix_path_to_win`. (#15184)
> * Remove `conda.exports.iteritems`. Use builtin `dict.items()` instead. (#15184)
> * Remove unused class `conda.exports.Completer`. (#15184)
> * Remove unused class `conda.exports.InstalledPackages`. (#15184)
> * Remove constant `move_to_trash`. (#15184)
> * Remove constant `KEYS`. (#15184)
> * Remove constant `KEYS_DIR`. (#15184)
> * Remove unused method `conda.exports.verify`. (#15184)
> * Remove `conda.exports.symlink_conda`. Use `conda.activate` instead. (#15184)
> * Remove `conda.exports._symlink_conda_help`. Use `conda.activate` instead. (#15184)
> * Remove `conda.exports.win_conda_bat_redirect`. Use `conda.activate` instead. (#15184)

Author: ```suggestion
* Remove constant `conda.exports.win_path_to_unix`. (#15184)
* Remove constant `conda.exports.unix_path_to_win`. (#15184)
* Remove `conda.exports.iteritems`. Use builtin `dict.items()` instead. (#15184)
* Remove unused class `conda.exports.Completer`. (#15184)
* Remove unused class `conda.exports.InstalledPackages`. (#15184)
* Remove constant `conda.exports.move_to_trash`. (#15184)
* Remove constant `conda.exports.KEYS`. (#15184)
* Remove constant `conda.exports.KEYS_DIR`. (#15184)
* Remove unused method `conda.exports.verify`. (#15184)
* Remove `conda.exports.symlink_conda`. Use `conda.activate` instead. (#15184)
* Remove `conda.exports._symlink_conda_help`. Use `conda.activate` instead. (#15184)
* Remove `conda.exports.win_conda_bat_redirect`. Use `conda.activate` instead. (#15184)
```

* Remove constants `conda.testing.CondaCLIFixture`, `conda.testing.conda_cli`, `conda.testing.PathFactoryFixture`, `conda.testing.path_factory`, `conda.testing.TmpEnvFixture`, `conda.testing.tmp_env`, `conda.testing.TmpChannelFixture`, `conda.testing.tmp_channel`, `conda.testing.context_aware_monkeypatch`, `conda.testing.tmp_pkgs_dir`, `conda.testing.tmp_envs_dir`. (#15185)
* Remove constant `conda.testing.integration.BIN_DIRECTORY`. (#15185)
* Remove `conda.misc.rel_path`. (#15190)
* Remove argument `index_args` `conda.misc.explicit`. (#15190)
* Remove constant `conda.utils.path_identity`. Use `conda.common.path.path_identity` instead. (#15191)

> * Remove `conda.utils.unix_path_to_win`. Use `conda.common.path.unix_path_to_win` instead. (#15191)

Author: Restored.

* Remove `conda.core.index.get_reduced_index`. Use `conda.core.ReducedIndex` or `conda.core.Index.get_reduced_index` instead. (#15223)
* Remove `conda.core.subdir.make_feature_record`. Use `conda.core.models.records.PackageRecord.feature` instead. (#15223)
* Mark `conda.core.index._supplement_index_with_system` for removal in `26.3.x`
* Remove argument `max_retries` for `conda.gateways.disk.delete.rm_rf`. (#15224)
* Remove argument `trash` for `conda.gateways.disk.delete.rm_rf`. (#15224)
* Remove constant `conda.gateways.disk.delete.try_rmdir_all_empty`. (#15224)
* Remove constant `conda.gateways.disk.delete.move_to_trash`. (#15224)
* Remove constant `conda.gateways.disk.delete.move_path_to_trash`. (#15224)
* Remove function `conda.gateways.logging.initialize_root_logger`. (#15224)
* Remove module `conda.models.leased_path_entry`. (#15224)
* Remove function `conda.plugins.manager.get_virtual_packages`. Use `conda.plugins.manager.get_virtual_package_records` instead. (#15224)
* Remove function `conda.env.utils.make_temp_envs_dir`. Use `conda.testing.tmp_envs_dir` instead. (#15224)

> * Mark `unix_path_to_win` for removal in `26.3`. (#15230)

Author: ```suggestion
* Postpone `conda.utils.unix_path_to_win` deprecation to `26.3`. Use `conda.common.path.unix_path_to_win` instead. (#15230)
```
